# legend-simflow

End-to-end Snakemake workflow to run Monte Carlo simulations of signal and
background signatures in the LEGEND experiment and produce probability-density
functions (pdfs). Configuration metadata (e.g. rules for generating simulation
macros or post-processing settings) is stored at
[legend-simflow-config](https://github.com/legend-exp/legend-simflow-config).

## Key concepts

- "(Snakemake) workflow", "legend-simflow", "Simflow" are used interchangeably
  throughout the documentation to refer to the same concept.
- The Simflow is currently tailored around the
  [_remage_](https://remage.readthedocs.io) simulation ecosystem and uses the
  [LEGEND HDF5 (LH5)](https://legend-exp.github.io/legend-data-format-specs)
  file format for inputs and outputs.
- Simulations are labeled by a unique identifier (e.g. `hpge-bulk-2vbb`), often
  referred to as `simid` (simID). The identifiers are defined in
  [legend-simflow-config](https://github.com/legend-exp/legend-simflow-config)
  through `simconfig.yaml` files in tier directories `stp` and `vtx`.
- A simulation (`simid`) can consist of several jobs (simulation jobs with
  different random seeds run in parallel). Each job is assigned its own `jobid`
  (integer number).
- Each simulation is defined by a template macro (also stored as metadata) and
  by a set of rules (in `simconfig.yaml`) needed to generate the actual macros
  (template variable substitutions, number of primaries, number of jobs, etc).
- The production is organized in tiers. The state of a simulation in a certain
  tier is labeled as `<tier>.<simid>`. Snakemake understands this syntax.
- The production can be restricted to a subset of simulations by passing a list
  of identifiers to Snakemake.
- The generated pdfs refer to a user-defined selection of LEGEND data taking
  runs. Such a list of runs is specified through the configuration file.

### Workflow overview

```{mermaid} img/rulegraph.mmd
:caption: The graph of rules defined in the Simflow as generated by Snakemake (`snakemake --rulegraph`).
```

1. Geometry building: {py:mod}`pygeoml200` is used to build, for each `simid`, a
   global and shared GDML geometry instance for the workflow.

1. Tier `vtx` building: run simulations that generate Monte Carlo event vertices
   needed to some simulations in the next tier. A classic example is vertices
   for decays on the surface of HPGe detectors, which are generated by
   {py:mod}`revertex`. Simulations that do not need a special event vertices
   will directly start from tier `raw`.

1. Tier `stp` building: run full event simulations with _remage_. Simulation
   macro commands are generated according to rules defined in the metadata.

1. The LEGEND-200 data is queried to extract several runtime quantities of
   interest (HPGe energy resolution, electronic noise, hardware status, etc.).
   These are typically referred to as the "pars".

1. Run the first (hit-oriented) step of simulation post-processing. Here, a
   "hit" represents a collection of Geant4 "step" in a single detector
   (sensitive volume). In these tiers, hit-wise operations like optical map or
   HPGe detector models application are typically performed. The "run
   partitioning" is also performed at this stage (see below). Two tiers belong
   to this group:
   - Tier `opt`: convolution of the optical models (i.e. optical "maps")
   - Tier `hit`: convolution of HPGe detector models (energy and pulse shape)

   In both tiers, a dedicated time-coincidence map (or TCM, see
   {py:func}`pygama.evt.build_tcm.build_tcm`) is built to ease event
   reconstruction.

1. Tier `evt` building: a unified TCM including all hit-oriented tiers is
   created and used to organize the data into an event-oriented structure, i.e.
   a table where every row corresponds to an event.

1. Tier `cvt` building: the "concatenated event" tier performs a simple
   concatenation of tables from all `evt` files for a `simid` into a single
   file.

1. Validation plots are produced at several stages of the Simflow.

1. Tier `pdf` building: summarize `evt`-tier output into histograms (the pdfs).

### Run partitioning

"Run partitioning" refers to incorporating information about the experiment's
data taking runs for which the user wants to build pdfs:

- Partition the simulated event statistics into fractions corresponding to the
  actual total livetime fraction spanned by each selected run. This information
  is extracted from
  [`legend-metadata/datasets/runinfo.yaml`](https://github.com/legend-exp/legend-datasets/blob/main/runinfo.yaml)
- For each partition, apply HPGe models such as energy resolution or
  pulse-shape.
- ...apply optical models (detection probability lookup tables) for the
  scintillators.
- ...apply detector status flags (available in
  [`legend-metadata/datasets/statuses`](https://github.com/legend-exp/legend-datasets/blob/main/statuses))

## Next steps

```{toctree}
:maxdepth: 1

Package API reference <api/modules>
Snakemake rules <api/snakemake_rules>
```

```{toctree}
:maxdepth: 1

manual/index
```

```{toctree}
:maxdepth: 1
:caption: Related projects

remage <https://remage.readthedocs.io/>
```

```{toctree}
:maxdepth: 1
:caption: Development

developer
Source Code <https://github.com/legend-exp/legend-simflow>
```
